README.md, before:

# data

The purpose of this repository is to provide a home for several datasets that GeoNet hosts. These are generally updated on an infrequent or irregular basis. This repository provides easy access to the data, versioning and allows the owners/curators of the data to update files when needed.

Each folder is a self contained dataset, which includes:
 - a readme file with a description of the data
 - the files that contain the data
 - some tests that provide some sanity checks on the data (optional)
 
## Datasets currently in this repository
 
| Dataset Name  | Description   |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| [Moment Tensors](moment-tensor) | Moment tensor solutions for earthquakes in New Zealand (generally M>4) |
| [Site Class](site-class)    | Information on site class/characteristics for GeoNet sites  |
| [Rupture Models](rupture-models) | Seismic and geodetic fault models for significant earthquakes |
| [Strong Motion Peaks](strong-motion-peaks) | Summary files of peak strong motion measurements |
| [Strong Motion Flatfiles](nzsmd-flatfiles) | Compilation of specially-processed strong motion data and associated metadata|
| [Volcanic Alert Levels](volcanic-alert-levels) | Changes in Volcanic Alert Level (VAL) at New Zealand volcanoes |
| [Historic Volcanic Activity](historic-volcanic-activity) | Catalogues of historic volcanic activity at New Zealand volcanoes |

Note: The GeoNet website refers to the main branch for downloading this data through the website. Everything in the main branch requires review. Other branches might have more up to date information that is awaiting review and merging with main.

## Help with these datasets

For help, or to notify us about issues with the datasets in this repository, please see https://github.com/GeoNet/help.

Commit message:

Adding a DART trigger catalogue to the repo

README.md, after:

# data

The purpose of this repository is to provide a home for several datasets that GeoNet hosts. These are generally updated on an infrequent or irregular basis. This repository provides easy access to the data, versioning and allows the owners/curators of the data to update files when needed.

Each folder is a self contained dataset, which includes:
 - a readme file with a description of the data
 - the files that contain the data
 - some tests that provide some sanity checks on the data (optional)
 
## Datasets currently in this repository
 
| Dataset Name  | Description   |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| [DART Triggers](dart-triggers) | Catalogue of triggers generated on the DART Network |
| [Moment Tensors](moment-tensor) | Moment tensor solutions for earthquakes in New Zealand (generally M>4) |
| [Site Class](site-class)    | Information on site class/characteristics for GeoNet sites  |
| [Rupture Models](rupture-models) | Seismic and geodetic fault models for significant earthquakes |
| [Strong Motion Peaks](strong-motion-peaks) | Summary files of peak strong motion measurements |
| [Strong Motion Flatfiles](nzsmd-flatfiles) | Compilation of specially-processed strong motion data and associated metadata|
| [Volcanic Alert Levels](volcanic-alert-levels) | Changes in Volcanic Alert Level (VAL) at New Zealand volcanoes |
| [Historic Volcanic Activity](historic-volcanic-activity) | Catalogues of historic volcanic activity at New Zealand volcanoes |

Note: The GeoNet website refers to the main branch for downloading this data through the website. Everything in the main branch requires review. Other branches might have more up to date information that is awaiting review and merging with main.

## Help with these datasets

For help, or to notify us about issues with the datasets in this repository, please see https://github.com/GeoNet/help.
