dart-triggers/README.md, before:

## DART Triggers Catalogue

A Catalogue of automatic triggers detected by the DART Network. These triggers have been classified by a specialist at GNS Science into different categories as listed below and are sorted by station and UTC date-time. The triggers were classified and reviewed by a panel when the trigger classification was difficult. 

For plotting these signals, [Tilde Data Discovery](https://tilde.geonet.org.nz/ui/data-exploration#/) is a good tool. To use it, you will need to specify the DART and change the time period to the date shown by the triggered time. Data Discovery can also be used to download the data in JSON and CSV formats. If you would prefer an API please use [Tilde API](https://tilde.geonet.org.nz/v3/api-docs/).

For more information on the DART Network, please refer to the [GeoNet DART](https://www.geonet.org.nz/tsunami/dart) page.

This catalogue is updated regularly and was last updated on the 8th February 2023. 

| Category | Name | Description |
| -------- | ---- | ----------- |
| O | Subsidence/Offset | A sudden decrease that then becomes the new normal. |
| SP | Positive Spike | A positive spike with an unknown cause. Some of these could be single data points and numerical errors. |
| SN | Negative Spike | A negative spike with an unknown cause. Some of these could be single data points and numerical errors. |
| MS | Multiple Spikes | Common for NZA, includes multiple spikes / shark teeth patterns. |
| E | Earthquake | Contains an earthquake signal and can be related to an earthquake detection by the seismic network. |
| T | Tsunami | A tsunami event. |
| U | Unknown | An unclassified event. | 


### Citations and Further Information

To cite this catalogue please use the following DOI: https://doi.org/10.21420/8tcz-tv02. For further information on these signals or to notify us about issues with the catalogue, please use https://github.com/GeoNet/help.

Commit message:

Updated README with the latest definitions for the categories.
Made clear that this is currently a catalogue of Auto-triggers instead of all triggers, and added a way to contact us via email.

dart-triggers/README.md, after:

## DART Auto-Trigger Catalogue

A Catalogue of automatic triggers detected by the DART Network. These triggers have been classified by a specialist at GNS Science into different categories as listed below and are sorted by station and UTC date-time. The triggers were classified and reviewed by a panel when the trigger classification was difficult. 

For plotting these signals, [Tilde Data Discovery](https://tilde.geonet.org.nz/ui/data-exploration#/) is a good tool. To use it, you will need to specify the DART and change the time period to the date shown by the triggered time. Data Discovery can also be used to download the data in JSON and CSV formats. If you would prefer an API please use [Tilde API](https://tilde.geonet.org.nz/v3/api-docs/).

For more information on the DART Network, please refer to the [GeoNet DART](https://www.geonet.org.nz/tsunami/dart) page.

This catalogue is updated regularly and was last updated on the 8th February 2023. 

| Category | Name | Description |
| -------- | ---- | ----------- |
| O | Offset | A sudden change in pressure that then becomes the new normal. |
| SP | Positive Spike | A positive spike with an unknown cause. Some of these could be single data points and numerical errors. |
| SN | Negative Spike | A negative spike with an unknown cause. Some of these could be single data points and numerical errors. |
| MS | Multiple Spikes | Common for NZA, includes multiple spikes / shark teeth patterns. |
| E | Earthquake | Contains an earthquake signal and can be related to an earthquake detection by the seismic network. |
| T | Tsunami | A tsunami event. |
| U | Unclassified | An unclassified event. | 


### Citations and Further Information

For further information on the signals, or to notify us with suggestions or issues realted to this catalogue, please contact us at either Info@geonet.org.nz or https://github.com/GeoNet/help.

To cite this catalogue please use the following DOI: https://doi.org/10.21420/8tcz-tv02.
